hello Matt's fans welcome to a special
Christmas themed edition of Tom rocks
maths to celebrate mass week England now
I love Christmas but it is far too early
to be an investable ready and walking
down Oxford High Street the shops
already I've got their Christmas
decorations out there's tinsel there's
fairy lights and you know what else is
on display Christmas jumpers now don't
get me wrong Christmas jumpers are a lot
of fun but they are the ultimate in one
use fashion you buy one you wear it to
your school party or office party and it
probably never sees the light of day
again and this got me thinking what
effect does a Christmas jumper have on
climate change
fortunately the bulk of the calculation
has already been done for me
courtesy of the charity love your
clothes they estimate that around a
third of the UK already own a Christmas
jumper and about a quarter of the
population would go out again this year
and buy a new one
spending in excess of 300 million pounds
The Huffington Post of this one step
further and calculated that Christmas
jumpers bought this year will have an
impact on the environment equivalent to
half a million bathtubs full of water
and enough carbon dioxide to fill 179
party balloons per person in the UK
population so how much carbon dioxide
and water is this equal to the idea here
is for you to pause the video have a go
at this calculation yourself and then
come back resumed and I will tell you
what I got and you can compare this to
your answer let's start with water
so if we have 500,000 bathtubs filled
with water we need to know the average
size of a bathtub to convert that into
an amount of water per battle so in the
UK the average bathtub is 1.7 meters x
naught point 7 meters and is around nor
point 5 meters deep so this is taking a
bathtub to be a cuboid shape so if I
draw
a gram a bath looks something like this
we're saying this amount is no point
five meters this amount there's no point
seven the width and the length of the
bath is going to be one point seven
meters now if we use these values we
will get some amount of meters cubes and
we can convert that into liters per
battle but in a full-size bathtub you
can't fill the entire cuboid with water
there's actually some sort of bits
around the edge there's a thickness to
the bath itself and then in the bottom
often if you check your bath at home
there's a bit of a slope so a bathtub of
the standard or average size in the UK
1.7 meters by north point seven by not
0.5 will actually hold around 200 litres
when you account for the thickness of
the walls and the fact that the bottom
is sloped so now we know the amount or a
single battle at 200 litres we
multiplied 200 by the number of battles
five hundred thousand and that is going
to equal 100 million litres of water so
half a million bathtubs full of water
used in the production of Christmas
jumpers each year is equivalent to 100
million litres you can also convert this
into another measure for example the
amount of water required to fill an
Olympic swimming pool and this is
equivalent to 40 Olympic swimming pools
so how did you get on maybe you've got a
different answer to me you probably did
get a different answer to me than the
100 million litres of 40 Olympic
swimming pools that I've calculated here
something that is worth bearing in mind
is that a full bath tub
all around 200 liters of water but when
you take a bath yourself you of course
you're taking a part of the space within
the bathtub and you probably don't feel
it right to the very very top so a
common figure for the amount of water
used when taking a bath is 80 liters so
perhaps you use that value in your
calculation rather than the 200 that
I've used here so have a look at your
own number see how it compares to my 100
million litres did you overestimate did
you underestimate have a think and see
if you can come up with the reason for
maybe why you were slightly different to
my answer next up carbon dioxide so
we're told that the production of
Christmas jumpers is equivalent to a
hundred and seventy nine balloons per
person in the UK so we need to know the
UK population in 2019 I'm gonna say it's
around 66 million 72 179 times 66
million equals eleven thousand eight
hundred and fourteen million balloons
now that is some party so we now need to
convert 11 thousand eight hundred and
fourteen million balloons worth of
carbon dioxide into an amount in let's
say litres so we need to know the volume
of an individual balloon so if I were to
draw a balloon so there's something like
this bit of a stream coming down the
bottom tied at the bottom this is a
single party balloon now this is quite
an awkward shape so what I'm going to do
in this estimation because it is just an
estimate or approximation is I'm gonna
say this is kind of the same as a sphere
because a sphere we know where we have a
formula for calculating the volume of a
sphere and so we can use that to help us
with our estimate
answer so if I take a balloon to kind of
be the shape of a sphere a standard
party balloon has a diameter D equals 12
centimeters so the volume of a single
party balloon again approximating as a
sphere is equal to 4/3 times pi times
the radius cubed so if the diameter is
12 that's the full distance across the
balloon then the radius is half of the
diameter that radius is 6 2 times 6
cubed now plugging these numbers into a
calculator we work out that the volume
is 900 centimeters cubed which is equal
to not point 9 liters per party balloon
so finally all that's left to do is to
take the total number of balloons
multiplied by the volume of carbon
dioxide in each balloon to get our final
answer eleven thousand eight hundred and
fourteen million times naught point nine
which equals ten thousand six hundred
thirty-three million liters and if we
compare this to our method of
measurement for the water where I
converted the answer into Olympic
swimming pools we can do the same here
and ten thousand six hundred and thirty
three million litres of carbon dioxide
would be enough to fill four thousand
two hundred and fifty three Olympic
swimming pools again how did you do what
did you get in your calculation was it
more or was it less than my ten thousand
six hundred thirty three million liters
of carbon dioxide and just as before can
you pinpoint why our answers were
different as a fine
tasks why do you think the statistics
were presented in their original form in
terms of the number of balloons of
carbon dioxide per person and the number
of bath tubs of water and from that why
do you think I then presented my results
in terms of Olympic swimming pools what
do you think is easier to process really
big horrible numbers or something a
little bit more tangible this was of
course just a bit of fun but it just
goes to show that sometimes we can be
very wasteful as a species so this year
when it comes to choosing your Christmas
jumper why not recycle an old outfit and
turn it into your very own personalized
Christmas jumper it not only looks great
we'll be doing your part to save the
planet too
thank you very much for watching please
do remember to subscribe and check out
everything else that I do